ASIA AND THE PACIFIC  Indigenous Peoples of Asia and the Pacific and the 2008 Human Development Regional Report The Asia and Pacific region is home to several indigenous peoples, many of whom experience extreme poverty and marginalization. Areas populated with indigenous peoples are often the remotest and least developed in the region, with inadequate access to goods and services for sustainable living. Indigenous peoples also suffer from all forms of discrimination and human rights abuses, and many groups are not officially recognized by their respective governments. Land rights issues remain one of the biggest concerns for indigenous peoples across the region.5   The 2008 Human Development Regional Report from Asia Pacific focuses on the issue of corruption and its impact on human development.6 The Report is broad-based, encompassing many sectors, particularly the political and judicial sectors. It provides very little disaggregated data, and instead cites specific examples of corruption, including efforts to address this growing problem, from various countries in the region.  Indigenous peoples and their issues are not explicitly mentioned in the Report, and any references to the state of their human development would be integrated with the collective ﬁpoor and marginalized populationsﬂ in the region.   The following sectors are greatly impacted by corruption, which has detrimental effects to human development and achievement of MDGs in the Asia Pacific region: Economy According to the Report, extensive corruption is associated with lower levels of growth. Corruption is likely to hamper growth in the economic sector by weakening the social infrastructure and reducing the quality of investments in technology, communication, and transport infrastructure that are necessary for economic growth.  Corruption also undermines efforts at reducing poverty, which is the first goal of the MDGs, when public officials divert goods and services that are intended for the poor to wealthier households that can afford to bribe officials. The poor are the most vulnerable to corruption, as they lack neither social nor economic power to defend themselves against corrupt practices. In many cases, they fail to voice out abuses for fear of retribution. The poor also find themselves excluded from basic social services, such as health and education, due to widespread corruption in these sectors.   of poor and indigenous commudevelopments. Corruption andThe Report does not explicitly discuss the economic situation of indigenous peoples, but it does allude to their vulnerability to suffer from poverty as a result of illegal land grabbing as well as being denied access to key resources.   Education According to the Report, corruption is widespread in education systems. Corrupt officials siphon off funds that are intended for improving school buildings and other educational resources, such as books and classroom supplies as well as teachers. This is especially true for public education systems, and the poor suffer from inadequate educational institutions. Access to quality education has been limited to those who have the economic means to afford private education.  The Report does not explicitly mention the education situation of indigenous people. Health According to the Report, corruption can occur at various levels in the health services sector, ﬁfrom grand corruption, as funds are siphoned off during the construction of new hospitals or health centers, to petty corruption as health workers or administrators demand bribes just to perform their routine duties.ﬂ7 Corruption also results in poorer standards of health, particularly for those who do not have the economic means to pay for special health services.   The Report does not explicitly mention the health situation of indigenous people.  Environment Many countries in the Asia and Pacific region are rich in natural resources; however, corruption has undermined efforts to turn natural environments into powerhouses for sustainable development. Wealth from overexploitation of natural resources is being drained away due to corrupt practices, and leads to the depletion of resources and environmental degradation. Private companies often bribe officials to get permits for grand-scale logging and fishing, which have detrimental effects to the environment as well as to those people who depend on these resources for subsistence and livelihood. Corruption in natural resource management is particularly damaging for poor rural communities. The Report states that ﬁwhole communities, particularly indigenous people, suffer from the exhaustion of many natural resources, notably primary forests and inshore fishing grounds.ﬂ8   The Report also mentions land grabbing as a sad reality throughout Asia, where the lands nities have been illegally seized for government or private  bribery is all too often involved. Lands that traditionally have been occupied by indigenous peoples are being exploited by commercial interests in collusion with governments. It is emphasized in the Report that this is ﬁin stark contrast to Article 26 of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People adopted by the General Assembly in 2007, which recognizes indigenous peoples™ inalienable collective right to the ownership, development, use and control of lands, territories and resources.ﬂ9 On a more positive note, the Report states that Thailand, for example, is now taking a more local/regional approach rather than a top down attitude to combat corruption in natural resources management. The Phupan National Park, which was previously under the management of a Thai Community Forestry Division and is mentioned as having been a site of constant conflict, is now managed by Udon Thani Forestry Region Office, which works more closely with indigenous rights holders.  Conclusion  Overall, the goal of the 2008 HD Regional Report is to show how corruption undermines human development efforts in the Asia Pacific region. In terms of the development situation of indigenous peoples, the Report indicates how corruption is one of the major causes of prevailing challenges faced by indigenous peoples in this region, particularly in the context of natural resources management, as expropriation and exhaustion of resources such as forests and fishing grounds are most damaging to indigenous communities that depend on these resources.10 In order to combat corruption, the Report proposes a seven-point, action-oriented agenda to better human development conditions, including case studies of successful ongoing efforts from various countries to target corruption. The Report also states that decentralization is key to combating corruption and bribery, and recommends increased participation from the public in all aspects of decision making that affect their lives.   