CAMBODIA  Indigenous Peoples of Cambodia and the 2007 Human Development Report The indigenous peoples of Cambodia include the Brao, Chong or Khmer Daoem, Jarai, Kachak, Kanchruk, Kavet, Khaonh, Kraol, Kreung, Kui, Lun, Mil (Mel), Por (Poar, Pear), Phnong (Punong), Rhade (Ede), R™ong, S™och (Saoch), Stieng, Suoy, Thmon, and Tumpuon.11 They constitute about 1 percent of the Cambodian population and are spread across the provinces of Kratie, Mondolkiri, Rattanakiri, Stueng Treng, Kampong Thom, Koh Kong, Pursat, Kampong Speu, and Sihanoukville. Indigenous peoples, particularly in the northeast, have different ways of living compared with the rest of the Cambodian population. They are forest dependent, practice shifting cultivation, and live on spread-out hamlets.   The 2007 Human Development Report for Cambodia12 explicitly addresses the state of affairs of indigenous peoples in the country, particularly in the context of land issues, as it focuses on rural development and expanding opportunities for rural people in order to achieve human development and MDGs. Overall, the Report states that Cambodia is making moderate progress in meeting MDG targets. Access to education and health services has improved and poverty has declined. Primary school enrollment has risen significantly, and the gender gap in education is narrowing. These improvements in human development are due in part to Cambodia™s steady growth in the economic sector. Most indicators of growth, however, have been urban-based and in volatile industries, including garment export, tourism, and construction.  Amidst Cambodia™s increasing economic growth, inequality in income distribution exists and poverty is persistent in rural areas. Child and maternal mortality rates are still high and land issues pose a major challenge to the livelihoods of people, particularly in the more isolated rural areas. Although the Report does not provide disaggregated data specific to indigenous peoples, it shows that provinces in the northeast with the largest concentrations of indigenous inhabitants have the lowest Human Development Index values. Because agriculture employs most people who live in rural areas, low or uneven yields across the region greatly affect farmer™s incomes, and hence human development. The following aspects of development are a major concern in rural areas: Income distribution The Report states that of the one-third of the population that live below the poverty line, ral areas. A substantial percentage of the country™sindigenous lands vulnerable topopulation remain food insecure and at risk for ill health, malnourishment, and diseases. Access to safe drinking water is also a major concern in rural areas.   Available data in the Report suggest that poverty has risen from 40 percent to 58 percent in the mountainous/plateau provinces inhabited by indigenous peoples. According to the Report, this is the only region in the country where poverty rates have increased during the past decade.    Health Maternal mortality rates remain disproportionately high in rural areas, with more than 450 deaths per 100,000 live births. Infant mortality rates are also alarming, with 30,000 children dying each year from largely preventable causes, such as malaria, dengue, diarrhea, and water-borne diseases. Data disaggregated by region show that the northeastern provinces have the highest infant and maternal mortality rates, due in part to their remote location and inadequate access to basic health services. These areas have large populations of indigenous peoples. Education While primary school enrollments have significantly improved, retention is a major concern. The Report states that fewer than 50 percent of enrolled children complete the sixth grade, which implies that a large percentage of the future labor force may not be able to compete in the knowledge-based economies. According to the Report, real achievements in education remain elusive, and improving primary school enrollment rates, especially for girls, remains a challenge.  The Report does not specifically mention the education situation of indigenous children; however, disaggregated data show that the northeast provinces have some of the lowest primary school enrollment and literacy-to-population rates, particularly Rattanakiri and Stueng TrengŠboth of which have large populations of indigenous people.  Natural resources Land conflicts are rising due to land grabbing and the Economic Land Concessions (ELCs) policy, which allows the government to give several thousand hectares of land to private companies in order to boost commercial production of crops.13 ELCs, however, have been given out ﬁwithout following the due legal process and with little transparencyﬂ14 and have resulted in pushing out the more vulnerable and less-informed rural people. Landlessness among rural households is increasing, and this is particularly true for indigenous peoples in the northeastern provinces who still lack community title to their ancestral lands despite provisions in the 2001 Land Law, which recognizes the collective land rights of indigenous peoples. According to the Report, not a single collective ownership title has yet been awarded, and lack of enforcement has rendered  encroachment and exploitation. In addition, natural resources, such as fish and forests, necessary for their subsistence and livelihood are being depleted due to encroachment and overexploitation. Data in the Report suggest that indigenous peoples have already lost 30 percent of their traditional forest lands.15 In response to these issues, the Report included a highlighted section where indigenous peoples voiced out their concerns and asked that their rights be recognized. The following is an excerpt: Indigenous peoples™ livelihood depends on forest produce. It is not destructive to the forest because we think that the land and forest, preserved by our ancestors, are our lives. We speak different languages, depending on each particular indigenous people. The indigenous people are determined to retain this knowledge– We would like to request to the Government that land security is ensured, forest and natural resources are protected, some social services are provided such as health, language education is offered, and the rights of indigenous people are more broadly promoted in Cambodia.16  Conclusion The 2007 HDR from Cambodia states that in order to achieve Cambodia™s MDGs and improve human development, the country will need to focus on improving rural livelihoods, targeting areas that are experiencing low income distribution and inadequate access to land, goods, and services that will allow them to live sustainable lives. Proposed reforms include increasing rural people™s access to land and natural resources and making investments in rural infrastructure as well as human capital in order to improve the quality of life of people living in rural areas. In terms of poverty and human development, indigenous peoples rank as poorer and have lower human development compared with the rest of the Cambodian populace. In addition, they face land alienation due to land grabbing and concessions. It is encouraging to see that the Human Development Report addresses these issues and proposes sound recommendations to improve the lives of indigenous Cambodians.   