 GHANA  Indigenous Peoples and the 2007 Human Development Report According to the 2007 Human Development Report from Ghana, the Ghanaian society comprises five major ethnic groups: the Akan (49.1%), the Ewe (12.7%), Mole Dagbani (16.5%), the Guan, and the Ga-Adangbe (8.0%), as well as an estimated 63 other separate ethnic groups.17 The five major ethnic groups are further divided into several smaller groups. These various subdivisions as well as their geographic distribution ﬁmake understanding the intricacies of ethnicity in Ghana a complex affair.ﬂ18 Among the ethnic minorities who may be recognized as indigenous are the Kassena people in northern Ghana.19 Numbering about 30,000, they are a subset of the Gurunsi who inhabit the areas of southern Burkina Faso and northern Ghana. The majority of Kassena people practice sedentary farming.  The Ghana HDR focuses on the persistence of social exclusion in society and its impact on human development. Despite significant achievements in economic growth, there is a growing perception that there are groups of people who are not benefiting from this growth and are thus socially excluded. According to the Report, social exclusion is multidimensional and results from differential access of social groups to goods and services based on cultural stratification, weak institutional support mechanisms, poverty and discrimination based on social and political biases, and inter-generational transfer of poverty. Persons identified as excluded include small-scale food producers, the unemployed or underemployed, disadvantaged women, unskilled youths, children in difficult circumstances, the elderly victims of abuse, people with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, displaced communities, isolated communities, and the extremely poor. The Report specifically mentions indigenous peoples on this list as those living in areas affected by relocation and decline of economic activities.  The Report attempts to measure exclusion from the economic, social, political, and legal processes through an analysis of the current state of human development in Ghana. Development challenges that drive social exclusion include poverty and insecure livelihoods, geographical disparity, gender disparity in education and employment, inadequate health services, environmental degradation, and cultural and political bias. They are discussed at length in the Report in the context of the MDGs. The following are the most pressing challenges:Disparities between and within regions are important drivers of social exclusion in Ghana. People who inhabit remote areas experience spatial isolation due to lack of adequate access to goods and services, and suffer harsh economic environments. Inequitable distribution of infrastructure, such as transportation and communication lines, has stunted local economic growth and development in the more remote areas.  The Report does not specifically mention indigenous peoples; however, it does state that northern Ghana, which includes areas inhabited by the Kassena, is most likely to experience exclusion due to its harsh economic environment and isolation.  Poverty Ghana has been experiencing a general decline in poverty, and disparities between regions in income distribution have been decreasing. If reduction rates are maintained, the Report states that Ghana will be able to achieve its MDG target of reducing the poverty rate by half in 2009. The highest poverty rates occur in the agriculture and the informal sectors, with food farmers the poorest and most afflicted with poverty. High unemployment rates among youths and women are also a concern. However, the gender gap in employment for men and women is decreasing due to women™s increasing access to education.   Poor and inequitable income distribution is a driving force for social exclusion, and often measures to overcome poverty have enhanced marginalization. Although this section of the Report does not explicitly mention indigenous peoples, it states that those who practice semi-subsistence, small-scale food farming and those in the informal sectors have been identified as the most vulnerable to risk of food insecurity, unpredictable income flows, and social exclusion.  Education Access to education has been improving in Ghana, particularly in meeting MDGs in increasing enrollment as well as achieving gender parity in schools. However, progress at all levels of education has been less than satisfactory. Regional disparities exist in terms of access, with the Northeast region having the poorest access due to geographic isolation, poverty, and social exclusion. Illiteracy rates are also highest in the Northern regions. These are areas inhabited by the Kassena people.  Health Increasing geographical and socio-cultural access to health care services is a major priority for the health sector in Ghana. Health indicators show that urban areas enjoy relatively good access to health care compared with rural areas, with the remote Northern areas having the worst access to health services. The spread of HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases also remains a major concern. Although the Report does not explicitly mention the health situation of indigenous peoples, it states that the northern regions have the highest prevalence of infant and maternal mortality, despite improvements in reducing rates at the national level.  studies be undertaken using diIn response to meeting MDG targets in maternal mortality, the Government initiated the High Impact Rapid Delivery Approach in the northern region, with the aim of focusing on key interventions to reduce the incidence of mortality. Measures are also being taken across the country to improve access to health services and the quality of health facilities, as well as increase access to safe drinking water to minimize the impact of water-borne diseases.  Social structure The Report includes a chapter on the cultural and ethnic structures of Ghanaian society and how certain cultural and religious practices, traditional systems, and kinship and group relations have contributed to social exclusion and have given rise to ethnocentrism. Ethnically motivated violence and crime as well as the disempowerment of the more vulnerable groups and other members of society (such as women, youths, and the elderly) have enhanced marginalization. Among the gender issues cited in the Report, it provides as an example the situation of Kassena women who ﬁhave to rely on their husbands or male children to obtain access to critical resources such as land, livestock and the labour of extended family members.ﬂ20 Another major issue is the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM), which the Report cites as a serious health risk among the Kassena. In many cases, FGM leads to the spread of HIV/AIDS, different levels of disabilities, and deaths. The Report recommends that inter-ethnic contact should be encouraged in order to increase tolerance between the different groups and improve their understanding of each other™s cultural practices and traditions. The Report also recommends that those practices that lead to exclusion should be abolished, but that culturally inclusive practices should be maintained and enhanced, such as the recognition of the languages of small ethno-linguistic groups.   Conclusion The Report states that despite improvements in human development in Ghana, social exclusion persists and is particularly affecting women, the rural poor, and socially and culturally marginalized groups. For Ghana to maintain and continue to improve human development and achieve MDG targets, efforts need to be made to empower the socially excluded and encourage them to participate in decision making that affects their lives. Spatial and socio-cultural barriers to inclusion, such as geographic isolation and cultural discrimination, need to be further addressed.   The present Report lacks disaggregated data on the various ethnic and indigenous groups in Ghana, but it is encouraging to see that the Report is recommending that empirical saggregated data to further explore the causes of regional disparities in human development and the persistence of exclusion of the more vulnerable groups in Ghana.  