KENYA  Indigenous Peoples and the 2006 Human Development Report Indigenous peoples of Kenya include the Awer, Boni, Borana, Burgi, Elmolo, Endorois, Ilchamus, Gaaljecel, Gabra, Maasai, Malakote, Munyayaya, Ogiek, Orma, Pokot, Rendille, Sabaot, Sakuye, Samburu, Sengwer, Somali, Talai, Turkana, Watta, and Yakuu.21 Many are pastoralists who inhabit the arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) that make up more than 80 percent of Kenya™s landmass and are home to 25 percent of the national population.22 Some practice small-scale agriculture, and small pockets of hunter-gatherer communities subsist in forested areas.23 The 2006 Human Development Report from Kenya does not explicitly mention or present disaggregated data on indigenous peoples, despite the fact that ASALs have the highest levels of food poverty in Kenya due to persistent droughts, and people occupying these areas have the lowest access to health and social services.24 For example, the three districts with the lowest Human Development Index are Turkana (0.172), Wajir (0.256), and Garissa (0.267). These are regions mainly populated by indigenous peoples. Although indigenous issues are invisible in the Report, the HDR does address issues in the ASALs in the context of the MDGs and in Kenya™s effort to provide increased human security to its citizens in order to improve development and meet MDG targets. The following key areas in Kenya™s MDGs are discussed in the context of human security: Education Performance indicators in the education sector show significant improvements, and Kenya has taken successful measures to meet its MDG targets in education. Overall school enrollment rate has increased substantially in the last two years (2004-2006) due to the implementation of the Free Primary Education program. There are no disaggregated data available on the enrollment rates of indigenous children; however, in line with the encouraging process of striving toward the achievement of universal primary education in Kenya, mechanisms have been put in place to target children in marginalized areas, such as ASALs, which are heavily populated by indigenous peoples. Equal access has also been a major concern, which prompted the Ministry of Education in Kenya to take measures to address equal access to education, from poor families. Health Public health remains a major concern in Kenya. With communicable diseases still crippling large numbers of Kenya™s population as well as high infant and maternal mortality, MDG targets are far from being met and huge efforts are required to improve health and to stop diseases from further eroding Kenya™s fragile state of development. Infant and maternal mortality rates are highest in the poorer regions, and huge disparities exist between urban and rural areas. Under-five mortality rates are 26 percent higher in rural areas (including ASALs) than in urban areas.  There are no data specific to the health of indigenous peoples in the Report, but disaggregate data show that child mortality is highest in Nyanza and Northeastern provinces, where there are large populations of indigenous peoples. Except for neonatal mortality, all childhood mortality indicators are highest in Nyanza province and lowest in Central province. Huge efforts are needed to reduce infant mortality rates, particularly in ASALs, where HIV/ AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and other communicable diseases are rife and are a constant threat to young children with still developing immune systems living in abject poverty with little or no health care at their disposal.   Maternal mortality shows no improvement and is getting worse. The report does not break down maternal health by region, but one could hazard to guess that, following the pattern of child mortality, women in severely wealth-compromised regions, such as Nyanza and the Northeastern provinces (populated mostly by indigenous peoples), with their evident lack of proper health care and facilities, would be suffering a higher maternal mortality rate than those living in more affluent areas in Kenya. The Report acknowledges Kenya™s poor and declining performance in maternal health, and it specifically mentions what changes are needed to reduce maternal mortality in order to achieve MDG targets. Poverty The Report indicates that Kenya, despite best intentions, still struggles to meet MDG targets, particularly in eradicating extreme poverty and hunger. Vulnerability to food insecurity has been persistent in Kenya, but the food problem is described as mainly transitory in natureŠperiodic droughts, institutional failures, and poor policies cause food crop and livestock production to decline, forcing the country to import substantial foodstuffs. Poverty rates show considerable disparities between regions, with poverty levels and food insecurity highest in the ASALs, areas with large populations of indigenous peoples. The Report states that while food crisis in the ASAL areas has been attributed to climatic and environmental conditions, other important factors include limited alternative sources of income, exploitative cereal marketing channels, unavailability of drought and disease resistant crop varieties, low/limited crop diversification, poor storage methods, lack of credit services, illiteracy, and poverty.  The Report shows that measures have been put in place to deal with extreme poverty, particularly in those areas most affected. These include the establishment of the Arid Resource Management Programme (ALRMP), which monitors the food security situation in the arid areas. In collaboration with other institutions they provide early warnings of food shortages in the country. Sadly, however, these efforts are usually inadequate, according to the Early Warning System Network, which is the Government™s response to food emergency situations. On a positive note, it is worth mentioning that Kenya has undertaken a school-feeding programme for primary schools in the ASALs to supplement dietary needs over the years. During a recent drought, the Government also extended the programme to secondary schools that were hard hit by the situation. This intervention has ensured that students remain in school as well as increase enrollment for those who have attained the school-going age.   Conclusion The 2006 HDR from Kenya provides a thorough and in depth review of each of the key challenges the country faces in order to achieve human development goals and states that major efforts in increasing human security are required to combat extreme poverty and meet MDG targets. The Report stops short of making any direct mention of the current state of development of Kenya™s indigenous peoples and communities. It does, however, provide disaggregated data by region in an effort to describe the level of development in different parts of the country. It is thus possible to derive a broad picture of the state of human development of indigenous peoples in Kenya. It is also encouraging to see that measures are being taken to address poverty, health, and security issues in those areas with large populations of indigenous peoples.  