RUSSIAN FEDERATION  Indigenous Peoples of Russia and the 2006/2007 Human Development Report Officially recognized indigenous peoples in the Russian Federation are referred to as ﬁnumerically small indigenous peoples of the North, Siberia, and the Far East.ﬂ33 To date, there are 44 recognized groups in Russia, numbering around 250,000 individuals. Group sizes range from 35-45 thousand individuals in the larger groups, such as the Evenk and Nenets, to a few dozen or few hundred individuals in the smaller groups, such as the Enets and Orok. The cultural, territorial, and political rights of indigenous peoples are protected under the Russian Constitution and national legislation.34  The 2006/2007 Human Development Report from Russia focuses on the country™s human development goals, challenges, and achievements at the regional level.35 The scope of the Report is very extensive due to the enormous size of the Russian Federation, with all its republics and autonomous nations. It does not specifically mention any indigenous peoples but rather infrequently refers to them in different contexts. One can, however, derive the development situation of indigenous peoples in the context of the MDGs, based on the geographical analyses and dissections the Report provides.  There are no national data provided in the Report; therefore, the state of the following key aspects of human development in Russia are disaggregated by region:   Income distribution and poverty Official data suggests that 25.5 million people, or 17.6% of the total population, are in poverty. Disparities in income distribution also exist between and within regions. The Komi Republic and the neighboring Nenets Autonomous District have generally higher incomes due to oil operations. These income levels are unfortunately not extended to rural areas, where several indigenous peoples reside. Rural areas in the Nenets district are also home to indigenous peoples who, if employed at all, work in very low paid agricultural jobs. According to the Report, ﬁautochthonous populations (Nenets and Komi) constitute most of the workforce in agriculture where wages are 2.5-3 times lower than the regional averageŠan inequality that creates a permanent layer of extreme poverty in the North.ﬂ36  To combat poverty in the Komi region, the government has introduced a poverty reduction program that includes subsidizing interest rates. This program appears to be  with the growth of salaries in this region, reduced theorganization that addresses genumber of people below the poverty line. Sadly, however, this upward trend does not affect the rural areas, and socio-economic indicators continue to decline. The Report further states that in Nenets district and Komi Republic, extreme poverty seems to be ethnically based.  In the Southern Federal District, Dagestan is home to 60 ethnic groups and indigenous peoples speaking over 30 different languages. The bulk of the population lives in the plains and foothills regions, while the Republic™s highlands and northern regions are virtually uninhabited. Dagestan heavily relies on federal subsidies. As in Komi Republic and Nenets, indigenous peoples are found living mostly in rural areas. It is therefore worrying to see that the unemployment rate in rural areas (which accounts for about 84% of registered unemployment) is nearly six times the national average. Despite a massive, state-subsidized education program, Dagestan remains one of the least developed areas in the Russian Federation. Indigenous peoples living in the plains and foothills, especially, are bearing the brunt of Dagestan™s developmental woes. In the Far Eastern district, the Report mentions that the area suffers from stubbornly high rates of extreme poverty. While the overall poverty levels are declining, extreme poverty levels have remained the same due to large parts of the population having no steady source of income. The Report mentions that many people from indigenous ethnic groups form part of this population.  Siberia™s autonomous regions are also home to many indigenous peoples. The report describes how Siberia is so far behind the rest of Russia in terms of development that it has, at least in certain parts ﬁbarely emerged from the 19th century.ﬂ37 Chronic poverty is rife, unemployment is higher than the national average, and housing issues continue to plague the region. Education On a more positive note, the Report states that Dagestan, which is home to many indigenous peoples ﬁoutranks many of Russia™s major cities by numbers of young people in education,ﬂ with 415,664 students enrolled in 1,664 educational institutions, due to the government-subsidized education program.38 The Report, however, does not mention if the program benefits the several indigenous children living in this region.  Gender parity In Komi there is a huge gap in salaries between women and men across various sectors. This trend does not seem to be abating. Women, for example, account for over 80% of low paid employees in the public sector. Many organizations have been set up in order to help women achieve gender equality, such as the Komi Republic Women™s Union and the Women™s Chamber of the Komi Republic. The Report also mentions that there is now an nder inequality among minority groups: the Komi Union of Women from Indigenous Ethnic Groups. Despite these encouraging development opportunities for women, gender equality in the Republic remains far from realization.  Health The Report alarmingly states that over a third of children born in the Komi district are born ill, despite the fact that infant mortality indicators in the Republic are better than the national average. Furthermore, child mortality in the Nenets district is up to 1.8 times higher than the national average. These high mortality rates are attributed to harsh climatic conditions as well as ﬁhigh child mortality among small indigenous ethnic groups.ﬂ39 The report cites limited access to medical services in remote villages and alcoholism as reasons. The Khanty-Mansi region has managed to reduce infant mortality to Western European levels. This astonishing achievement is based on an early diagnosis system as well as well-equipped health facilities. This is highly encouraging given the high density of indigenous populations living there, although no specific mention is made about them in this section of the Report.  The Komi region has implemented a series of new measures to improve maternal health. Women with medium- or high-risk pregnancies are sent to the Republic™s main hospitals, and consulting departments have been set up to provide monitoring and emergency treatment particularly for people from rural areas. This trend is very positive, as these are areas populated with indigenous peoples.   Environmental sustainability  According to the Report, Russia experiences very serious environmental issues across the country. These problems are largely due to the legacy of the Soviet industrialization ﬁwhen cities were built around or near large plants and factories with little regard for the environment and without creating adequate buffer zones.ﬂ40 Even today, environmental stability is still not seen as a major priority, as it takes its place behind economic development. Russia™s most pressing ecological problem is water pollution and water shortages, as well as lack of proper waste management. Another serious issue is severe metallurgic pollution from Soviet era industrial plants and mining areas. This contaminates ground water and pollutes the air. Dagestan™s environmental state, for example, is poor, due to pollution by harmful toxic and biological waste. Traditional energy sources and raw materials are being depleted, and the natural balance in the environment has not been respected.  Depletion and degradation of natural resources especially affect indigenous peoples and others who depend on these resources for subsistence or livelihood. The indigenous peoples in Yakutia, for example, have always depended on hunting, fishing, and reindeer breeding. The period since the break-up of the USSR has brought a crisis, as captive reindeer herds and wild reindeer have been slaughtered and fisheries have been depleted.  The Report states that Russia is fully aware of the need for ecological sustainability. A draft program, which ensures environmental stability, has been prepared for 2007Œ2010.  Conclusion Russia, with its vast landmass, is home to several indigenous peoples, many of whom are extremely marginalized. Huge distances to urban areas also lead to their partly isolated existence.  The indigenous peoples of Russia are in need of programmes and policies to address extreme poverty, health problems, unemployment, and alcohol abuse on a massive scale. In addition, greater attention should be paid to environmental issues and respect and consideration shown for the lifestyles of indigenous peoples. Various support and aid structures are necessary to implement comprehensive strategies to assist indigenous peoples in their efforts to live sustainable lives and to see their rights respected and fulfilled, including their inclusion in decision making that may affect their future.    